A modernized approach to
sentiment analysis of product
reviews using BiGRU and RNN
based LSTM deep learning models
L. Godlin Atlas1, Daniel Arockiam2, Arvindhan Muthusamy2, Balamurugan Balusamy3,
Shitharth Selvarajan4,7,8,9, Taher Al-Shehari5 & Nasser A. Alsadhan6
With the advent of Web 2.0 and popularization of online shopping applications, there has been a huge
upsurge of user generated content in recent times. Leading companies and top brands are trying to
exploit this data and analyze the market demands and reach of their products among consumers using
opinion mining. Sentiment analysis is a hot topic of research in the e-commerce industry. This paper
proposes such a novel sentence level sentiment analysis approach for mining online product reviews
using natural language processing and deep learning techniques. The proposed model consists of
various stages like web crawling and collecting product reviews, preprocessing, feature extraction,
sentiment analysis and polarity classification. The input reviews are preprocessed using natural
language processing techniques like tokenization, lemmatization, stop word removal, named entity
recognition and part of speech tagging. Feature extraction is done using bidirectional gated recurrent
unit shortly called as BiGRU feature extractor and the sentiments are classified into three polarities
such as positive, negative and neutral using a hybrid recurrent neural network based long short-term
memory classifier. The specific combination of techniques employed here and applying it to a new
kind of online product review is making the proposed model to be novel. Performance evaluation
metrics such as accuracy, precision, recall, F measure and AUC are calculated for the proposed model
and compared with many existing techniques like deep convolutional neural network, multilayer
perceptron, CapsuleNet and generative adversarial networks. The proposed model can be used in a
variety of applications like market research, social network mining, recommendation systems, brand
analysis, product quality management etc. and is found to generate promising results when compared
to prevailing models.
Keywords Sentiment analysis, Product reviews, Deep learning, LSTM, BiGRU, Natural language processing
Sentiment analysis is an especially important field of natural language processing which analyzes the sentiment
or emotion that underlies a text1. It has been found that sentiment analysis plays a very vital role in making
critical business decisions such as launching new products, making changes to a product based on the customers’
opinions or even withdrawing them from the market2. With the evolution of the Internet and giant growth of
information and technology, this concept of sentiment analysis has been made possible. In the initial days when
the Internet was first launched it was more of a read only basis. But now having evolved over the years, the
Internet is used for both reading and writing purposes. Millions of people all around the world have the freedom
to express their thoughts, views, opinions, feedback and share their personal experience in various applications
like Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Dimity, Tumblr etc3.

Today’s web is a major source of unstructured data that contains a plethora of information. With the
introduction of ecommerce applications, online shopping has gained much popularity4. There are numerous
websites and online applications available such as Flipkart, Amazon, Myntra, Ajio, ShopClues that sell a range
of products from books, gadgets, accessories, groceries and what not. An additional advantage is that all of
these websites provide an opportunity for their customers to share both positive and negative feedback about
the product that they have bought5. The reviews and feedback shared by one customer serves as an input for
another customer and influence his decision in many ways. Hence business firms are trying to exploit this user
generated information about the product and use it for the betterment of the organization6. Sometimes the
buyer itself conducts a survey which records the responses and insights of its stakeholders to know the buying
interests of the customer in a better manner and enable improvisations. Comments from respective customers
serve as a major source of information about the market demand and product trend and hence are considered
very valuable.
There are several sources that generate personalized user data such as review sites like epinion, Zdnet, IMDb,
CNET, consumer reviews etc.7. Reviews are available regarding products, shopping experience, books, tourist
spots, movies, food, hotel service, hiring companies, banks, colleges, schools, airlines, transport and several other
micro services. It has now become a practice to refer to the Internet and study the reviews of an organization or
service before trying it8. The central idea behind social networking sites is to make the Internet a user friendly
one providing opportunity for the common man to raise his voice for or against anything. The success of initial
social media networks such as Orkut has paved way for the explosion of social media today which allows many
people to participate in online forums, discussions and debates and anticipate their feelings and attitudes9.
In the olden days when television, radios, newspapers, and magazines were the only form of mass media,
advertisements played an especially important role in business decision making. But nowadays economists agree
to the fact that personalized reviews act as a standard or reference for purchasers10. It is said that these reviews act
as a good source of information for both the sellers and buyers. The producers are able to analyze their marketing
strategy without relying upon a third person as they are able to get access directly to the comments made by
their customers11. It also gives a fair chance to the consumers to communicate their opinions, appreciations, and
dissatisfaction about the product to the manufacturers directly so that appropriate corrective measures can be
taken. Online shopping has become the norm of the day, which is beneficial for both parties with extra offers and
great deals. Offline shopping is very much confined in nature and incurs additional cost both to the producer
and the consumer12.
Existing techniques suffer from the fact that many of them rely upon lexicon-based analysis of sentiment to
some extent. Lexicon based analysis depends heavily upon words present in the dictionary. But not always will
the customer express his views in a direct manner. Sometimes, they may also register a comment in a sarcastic
manner. This will lead to misclassification of review polarity. But the proposed system will be able to identify
the exact polarity of the review comment even though it has been written sarcastically with the help of LSTM
classifier. Our proposed methodology also perform real time analysis of product reviews and showcases the
actual process of execution.
Types and levels of sentiment analysis
Sentiment analysis is a fast-growing field that is much appreciated because of its various applications in business-
oriented research. It is also a very hot topic of research that has information related to many other business
domains. It can be performed in two ways based on lexicon and machine learning techniques13. Lexicon based
sentiment analysis can be split into two types called dictionary based and corpus-based sentiment analysis.
Dictionary based sentiment analysis is performed based on words present in the dictionary whereas corpus-
based sentiment analysis is carried out using words in a statistical and semantic manner. Machine learning
approach towards sentiment analysis makes use of a labeled data set which is employed for training the classifiers
and testing them thereafter14. There is another type of sentiment analysis called the hybrid method which
combines both the properties of lexicon based and machine learning based sentiment analysis. Figure 1 below
depicts the types of sentiment analysis.
There are three levels of sentiment analysis called the aspect level or feature level sentiment analysis, sentence
level sentiment analysis and document level sentiment analysis15. Aspect level sentiment analysis is exceptionally
fine grained in nature and contains reviews about a particular aspect of a product. For example, the quality
of camera of a mobile phone, cooling properties of an air conditioner, mileage provided by an automobile
etc. Instead of describing the product as a whole, aspect level reviews contain feedback and opinions about
a particular feature of a product16. Sentence level sentiment analysis works on a few sentences that describe a
product either in a positive manner or in a negative manner.
This is the most widely adopted level of sentiment analysis because product reviews usually contain only
a few or more sentences17. Document level sentiment analysis, otherwise called text level sentiment analysis,
will concentrate on the entire document that contains a review and gives a single classification for the entire
document. This is employed particularly in discussions, debates and blogs related to political scenarios, current
affairs, or public happenings18. Figure 2 illustrates the levels of sentiment analysis.
Sentiment analysis provides an edge for business because of which it has been adopted by retail giants like
Amazon and Taobao. The summarized research work contributions are given as follows.
1. To conduct the background study and literature review on sentiment analysis of product reviews using vari-
ous technologies and compare them.
2. A novel hybrid deep learning model is presented to classify polarity of sentiment using bidirectional gated
recurrent unit feature extractor and RNN based long short-term memory classifier.
